Hi, everybody.
Thank you for joining us today.
Welcome to session 200,
Making Your Application Unicode-Savvy.
If you were here yesterday in one
of the keynotes in the afternoon,
you saw Scott Forstall discuss the new
international features in the upcoming
version of Mac OS X codenamed Jaguar.
A lot of people have been
asking in the past years about
tier-three support in Mac OS X,
better support for Unicode fonts,
better support for
extended character sets,
better support for keyboards.
Well, I'm glad that today we're
going to be actually telling
you about all these things.
There is one thing that
was missing in the keynote,
is that support for new
languages will be achieved only,
and I say only, through Unicode.
So you will need to have
a Unicode application,
use Unicode technologies to display
text in order to be able to do,
you know, Indie scripts, support BIDI,
support Hebrew, Arabic,
and all these new languages
will be supporting in Mac OS X.
What was my title?
To discuss all these Unicode features
that we're going to be adding in
the upcoming version of Mac OS X,
I'd like to introduce Deborah Goldsmith,
who is the manager, actually,
of our phone team,
and she'll be discussing
all these features today.
Deborah.
"Is this mic on?
No.
Okay.
Alright, I'll speak over here.
Is this mic on?
Hello?
Okay.
Oh, is this mic on now?
Yes, okay.
Good morning, everyone.
Today we'll be talking about how to
make your application Unicode-savvy.
And in fact,
I'll be covering two sets of topics.
First, I'll give an overview of the
Unicode support in Mac OS X.
And then I'll go into more detail
about what you can do in your
application in order to support Unicode.
So first, let's look in depth at the
UniCode support in Mac OS X,
both in the current version
and in the new version,
codenamed Jaguar.
Before I do that,
I'd like to talk a little
bit about the past.
In the past, on Mac OS 9,
we used a technology called
WorldScript rather than UniCode.
And in WorldScript, every script,
every writing system had
its own character encoding.
In fact, some of them,
like Roman and Arabic, had more than one.
There were several different
versions of the Roman encoding.
And these character encodings were
based originally on standards.
Mac Roman is based on ASCII,
and Mac Japanese is based on ShiftJS,
but they weren't standard themselves.
They were unique to Apple.
How did you figure out which one of
these character encodings to use?
Well, that was implied by the ID of
the font you were using.
If the ID of a font fell
within a specific range,
that implied a specific script system
and a specific character encoding.
The problem with that is that if you
chose the wrong font for some text,
you got garbage.
Would anybody like to try to
guess what language that is
at the bottom of the slide?
No, it's not French, it's Korean,
but you can't tell because
it's the wrong font.
So,
Unicode provides a much better solution
to the problem of character encoding.
First of all,
Unicode is a worldwide standard.
It's defined by the
International Standards Organization and
the Unicode Consortium,
and it covers most of the writing
systems in use in the world today.
In Unicode,
unlike the Mac OS character sets,
every character has its
own unique code point.
So, a given code number means one
and exactly one character.
So, an A is always an A is always an A,
with apologies to Gertrude Stein.
And in Unicode 3.2,
there are 95,156 graphic characters,
meaning characters that produce
something on the screen.
So what are the advantages
for Mac OS X of using Unicode
as a character encoding?
First of all, there's one character
set for all languages.
You don't have to worry about
which character set you're
using for a specific language.
There's only one.
You get more characters
for existing languages.
So even if it's a language you're
already supporting through Unicode,
you can get access to more characters
that your customers want to get at.
And I'll talk more about that later.
There's support for more languages.
Xavier mentioned that
briefly in the introduction,
and we'll see more of that
later in the presentation.
A big plus is no more garbled text.
You don't see garbage like you
saw in the previous slide in
the Korean example because each
character has a unique meaning.
It doesn't depend on
the font that's in use.
Because Unicode covers
multiple languages,
you can get multiple languages at once
in your text stream without having to
worry about which font is being used.
So plain text can support
multiple languages.
A very important example of plain
text is file names in the Finder.
And finally,
because Unicode is a worldwide standard,
not just defined by Apple,
it's cross-platform.
You can send Unicode text to Windows,
to Unix systems across the internet,
and other applications and other
systems will know how to deal with it.
Let's take a little look at the
Unicode coverage in the currently
shipping version of Mac OS X 10.1.
In our Lucida Grande font,
we support a wide variety
of Roman characters as well
as several other languages.
So we have support for
the Roman characters,
not just that are in the
Mac Roman character set,
but also that you would find in
Mac Central European and several
other accented Latin letters.
We also support the Cyrillic
alphabet that's used in Russia and
other Eastern European countries.
And we support the set of accented
letters that are needed for Vietnamese.
And finally,
there's a complete set of modern
Greek characters in Lucida.
And that's all available
today to Unicode applications.
If you have a non-Unicode application,
Lucida will just look like another
Mac Roman font and you won't get
access to these extra characters.
Some of our other fonts, like Times,
Helvetica, Geneva, and so on,
also have an extended
set of Roman characters.
And again, these are only available
to Unicode applications.
Next, I'd like to talk about the
Japanese support in Mac OS X,
and this is where our Unicode
support really starts to shine.
In Mac OS X 10.1,
we shipped a family of six
desktop publishing quality
open type Type 1 fonts,
the Hidagino family.
And these fonts have more
Japanese characters than anything
we've seen on the Mac platform
and I think lead the industry in
terms of their character coverage.
These fonts contain the
complete repertoire of the new
GIST 213 character set standard.
They contain the complete set
of Adobe Japan 1.4 characters.
They also contain the set of Shaken
78 kanji that are used for photo
typesetting machines in Japan.
And finally,
they contain--they follow the
shape recommendations from the
National Language Committee for kanji
that are not in the Jo-Yo kanji,
the Hyogai kanji.
So it's a very complete
character repertoire.
So the net result of all this is,
compared to the approximately 7,000
characters that are available in
the Mac Japanese character set,
there are over 20,000 characters
available for Japanese support
in the Hiragino font family.
And again, those are only available
to Unicode applications.
And because of this,
the gaiji problem is greatly reduced.
Now, what's the gaiji problem?
For those of you not familiar with it,
7,000 characters just
isn't really enough.
To support Japanese the
way customers want to.
So if you're printing people's
business cards or doing some
other application where you need a
kanji that's not in Mac Japanese,
you have to use a font editor or a
special Dingbad font or something to
get that kanji character that you need.
And because it's done that way,
it's not a standard character,
and it's not interchangeable with
other applications or systems.
That's the gaiji problem.
Because the Hiragino fonts have
so many characters in them,
the gaiji problem is greatly reduced,
and rather than being something that
you have to deal with every single day,
it's something you can deal
with on an exception basis.
Because of that,
your data is now reusable and
can be sent to other platforms
where it'll be understood,
unlike the standard Gaiji solutions.
Because these are our
standard Japanese fonts,
you can use them in the user
interface of your application
and not just for documents.
And soon, planned support for Jaguar.
There are some characters in
the Hiragino fonts that are not
accessible through Unicode because
they don't have Unicode code points.
There are slightly variant versions of
kanji that exist in the font already.
And for Jaguar, we plan to provide access
to these additional glyphs
through an extension to TSM.
And that will also be discussed at
the ATSUI session this afternoon,
I believe.
So now I'd like to demonstrate
a few of the features of our
Japanese support via Unicode.
Here I have a document,
and this document contains some Japanese.
And I've color-coded some of
the characters in this document.
The characters that are in red are
characters that are not in GIS-208,
which is equivalent to Shift-GIS and
roughly equivalent to Mac Japanese.
And the characters that are
in blue are not in GIS-213,
but are in Unicode.
So in the first sentence here,
I have an example of a
name written two ways.
It's Yoshida.
And the standard way of writing
Yoshida is with this kanji.
But some people with that name
like to write their names this way,
and you can see that the
characters are slightly different.
In the standard version,
the middle stroke is longer,
but in this different version,
the middle stroke is shorter.
And if that's the way
I like to write my name,
I'm probably going to be a
little irritated if my computer
forces me to do it this way.
And so I'd like to be able to
use that character for my name,
but in a Mac Japanese application,
I can't do that because only
this version is available.
But in a Unicode application
with the Hiragino fonts,
many more kanji are available.
Similarly, here's some more family names.
They're all Kusanagi.
This one can be written using
characters in standard Mac Japanese,
but these two versions can't.
You can see that there are characters.
They're in red or orange, I guess.
And so they're in GIST 213,
but not in GIST 208, and again,
not in Mac Japanese.
Down here we have a person's name.
This is Takata,
except that the first kanji
is again a different form.
It's not available in Mac Japanese.
It is available in Unicode.
And there's also a character in
the person's given name that's
not available in Mac Japanese.
Here's the name of a
department store in Japan,
Takajimaya.
And again,
the first kanji is a non-standard form
that's not available in Mac Japanese.
So you can see that especially for
people's names or names of companies,
there's demand for these characters
because people have used them
traditionally for that purpose.
And you can help your
customers do that by supporting
Unicode in your application.
And I have a lot more examples in here.
I'm not going to go into them in detail.
But I want to show you
some of the differences,
the subtle differences that you can find
in kanji that are important to customers.
So this is a standard
Mac Japanese character.
And if I make it a little bit bigger,
you can see that in this
version of the character,
there's two strokes.
There's a break there.
But in this alternate version,
which is not in Mac Japanese and
not in GIST 213,
you can see it's done
with a single stroke.
So these are some of the kinds of
subtle differences that customers
can start to express with an
application that supports Unicode.
Before I go back to my slides,
I'd like to give a brief tour of the
Japanese repertoire in the Hiragino font.
So I brought up the character
palette in our Japanese input method,
and you can see all
these characters here.
But a lot of them, I don't know if it's
visible on the projector,
a lot of them are grayed out.
And the reason for that
is if you click on them,
you'll see at the bottom it will tell
you that a Unicode application is
required to access this character.
And you can see that there
are quite a number of them
that fall into that category.
In fact, most of them.
That's because two-thirds of the
characters in Hidagino are only
accessible to Unicode applications.
Let me go back to my slides now.
Okay, so that's what we have that's
shipping today in Mac OS 10.1.
How about what do we
have planned for Jaguar?
Well, in Jaguar, we'll be turning our
attention to Chinese,
and we're planning to include
some new fonts to support the
new Chinese GB18030 standard,
and these fonts contain
over 32,000 characters,
so they greatly increase
our Unicode repertoire.
These fonts fully support the entire
CJK unified ideograph region in Unicode,
plus ideographic extension A,
so this means all the ideographs
in versions of Unicode up to 3.0.
In addition, these fonts contain support
for the Yi writing system,
which is a minority
writing system in China,
and partial coverage of
Tibetan and Mongolian.
So we're adding new support all the time,
but again, this is only available
to Unicode applications.
Well, we're not just adding
new support for Chinese.
There are some old favorites that
have been available on Mac OS 9
for a long time that we're finally
adding support for in Mac OS X.
These include Arabic, Hebrew, Thai,
Devanagri, Gurmukhi, Gujarati, Icelandic,
Turkish, Greek, Croatian, Romanian,
Slovenian, and a new one, Hawaiian.
Which is very important in Hawaii,
obviously.
And as Xavier mentioned,
all future scripts,
these scripts plus all future scripts
that we might add in the future,
will only be available via Unicode.
We are not planning to support
World Script 1 or Roman variant
scripts on Mac OS X.
In addition,
we are not planning to make any
extensions to World Script 2,
so we will not be extending our
existing double byte character sets,
nor will we be adding new ones.
Everything in the future
will be via Unicode.
Now I'd like to talk a little
bit about what's required to add
support for a language to Mac OS X.
Well, first of all,
you need to have a font so that
you can display the characters on
the screen or on the printed page.
You also need to have an
input method or a keyboard so
you can enter the characters.
Other things you might want to
do are override the sort order.
The default is to use the Unicode
sort order that's defined in Unicode
Technical Standard Number 10,
but you might want to override
that for language-specific sorting.
And, of course,
every country has its own date, time,
and currency formats,
so you want to be able to format dates,
times, and monetary amounts using
that country's standards.
Unfortunately, today,
we don't allow you to override either
the collation order or the date,
time, and currency formatting,
which is why those are shown in blue.
It's always been possible
to add fonts to Mac OS X,
and new in our planned
support for Jaguar,
you can now add new keyboards.
But first,
I'll talk a little bit about what you
need to do with a font in order for
it to work with Unicode applications.
And this is aimed primarily
at font developers.
First of all,
your font needs to have a valid,
comprehensive Unicode CMAP.
And by comprehensive,
I mean that every character that your
font contains should have a CMAP entry.
Quite often, we'll see a font that has
a glyph for a character,
but there isn't an entry
in the Unicode CMAP.
And if that's the case,
it's not accessible to
a Unicode application.
It should have a valid POST table
in order for printing to work.
It needs to have a valid name table.
It needs containing the PostScript name,
which is, again,
necessary for printing and
also to work with AppKit.
It needs to have a correct unique name,
the full name, the family name,
the style, and a version string.
It should have a valid OS2 table,
and the fields of primary
interest there are the UL Unicode
range and the UL CodePage range.
The reason we would like to see those
in your font is so that the system
can tell what parts of Unicode or
what code pages the font supports.
And finally,
if your font supports a language
that has shaping behavior
like Devanagri or Arabic,
you want to put in a morph
table in order to control that.
Now, if your font just supports standard
Unicode composition like base
characters and combining accents,
it's planned for Jaguar that we will
support that composition automatically
because we will synthesize the
necessary tables in the system.
But still, even in that case,
it's better to put an explicit morph
table in your font because then you have
complete control as the font designer.
Okay,
next I'm going to talk about keyboards,
and we have something new that
we have planned for Jaguar,
and that's drop-in keyboard support.
So finally, thank you, thank you,
finally you can add a new keyboard
to Jaguar without having to
patch the system frameworks.
There's a new folder in the library
folder called Keyboard Layouts.
It can either be in the shared
library folder or the library
folder in your home directory.
And it supports all of our
existing keyboard formats,
the K-char format and the U-char format.
You can just drop a file in
containing one of those as long
as it's in the right format,
and that keyboard will become available.
But we also have a new keyboard format
that's meant to make it a little bit
easier to design your own keyboards.
And that's a Unicode keyboard layout
format defined via an XML text file.
Now, functionally,
this is equivalent to our
existing U-char keyboard layouts,
but it's a lot easier to edit.
In order to edit a U-char,
you had to read the documentation in
the document supporting Unicode input.
You had to decipher it.
There were no tools available.
It wasn't very easy to use.
So this makes things a lot easier.
Because we now support
drop-in keyboard layouts,
you can't get at these keyboard
layouts via the resource manager.
So if you have an application that
accesses keyboard resources directly,
you need to use the new APIs,
which have names like
KLGetKeyboardLayout,
et cetera, et cetera,
to access keyboards,
because the keyboards that are added
via the keyboard layouts folder will not
be accessible via the resource manager.
This is very similar to
what happened with fonts in
earlier versions of Mac OS X.
So now I'd like to show you a
little bit about what one of these
XML keyboard layouts looks like.
And I'll switch back to the demo machine.
Let me hide world text away.
Let's see.
You need to have text edit.
So here I have text edit.
And just to show that these
are part of the system,
Switch the encoding to UTF-8.
So, the keyboard layouts are in System,
Library, Keyboard Layouts,
look in the UniCode bundle.
And there they are.
Let's open the US Extended
Keyboard Layout.
I'll make this a little bigger.
Let's make it a 13-point font.
There.
Okay, so I opened this straight
out of the keyboard layouts
folder in the Jaguar system.
Here's an example.
This is the U.S.
extended keyboard layout,
which used to be called the
extended Roman keyboard layout.
And you can see it's a standard XML file,
and it just uses standard XML syntax to
describe how the keyboard layout works.
First,
there's a section which defines which
hardware keyboards are supported,
and this is necessary for
remapping keys on just keyboards.
There's a section which defines
how the modifier keys are mapped.
And then down here is
the meat of the keyboard,
which is the key map set,
which maps a virtual
key code to a character,
or in some cases, a state machine action.
And one of the nicest things about
using XML for a keyboard layout
is because XML uses Unicode,
this is a UTF-8 text file,
I can just put the characters
that I need right in the file.
So let's scroll down to a section where
there's some more interesting characters,
like the options section.
You can see there are all sorts
of interesting characters in here.
I don't know if those are visible.
You can just type them in directly.
Also, because it's XML,
you can use a numeric character
entity to define a character as well.
You don't have to actually
type it into the document.
And then way down at the end,
past all the key mapping sections...
There are the state machine actions
which control things like dead keys.
So this is a good example to look at.
If you install the Jaguar
CD that you received yesterday,
you can just navigate to the same place
and open this file with text edit and
look through it and get an idea of how
to create XML keyboard layouts yourself.
Okay, I'll go back to the slides now.
Okay, so that concludes the section on
Unicode support in the operating system,
and now I'd like to spend the rest
of the presentation talking about
what you can do in your application
to support all these great Unicode
features that you just saw.
Before I do that,
I'd like to talk about some of
the concepts that are important in
understanding and supporting Unicode.
And probably the most important
concept is the character glyph model.
It's a very central idea that's
necessary in processing Unicode.
And it's discussed in detail
in Unicode Technical Report 17.
The best way to understand the
distinction between characters and
glyphs is you can think of characters
as being like the spoken language.
They represent strings of information
the way that you would speak them aloud.
Glyphs are the shapes that you see
on the screen or on the printed page.
You can think of that as being
the written form of the language.
And quite often,
there's a one-to-one relationship
between characters and glyphs.
One character goes to one glyph,
but that's not always the case.
That's true in complex writing
systems like Arabic and Indic,
but it can be true even
in English and Japanese,
and we'll see examples of that later on.
And a Unicode rendering system,
in order to fully support Unicode,
has to be able to map characters to
glyphs in a many-to-many fashion.
So here's an example of the character
glyph model at its most daunting.
This is a string of characters
in the Devanagri script.
It's Sanskrit.
I'm going to use the mouse over here
so I can point things out a little bit.
Here is a string of Unicode
characters in Devanagri in the
order in which you might speak them.
But the order in which those
characters are presented on the
screen is actually quite different.
As part of the layout process,
while the first character
winds up in the first position,
that's not too surprising,
but the second character
winds up down here.
The third and the fourth characters
get combined into a ligature up here.
The fifth character is down here,
and the sixth character is
back over here in the middle.
So you can see there's quite a
lot of rearrangement that goes on,
and in no sense is there a
one-to-one mapping between
the characters and the glyphs.
And this is just a normal feature
of the Devanagri writing system.
And this is not the only writing system
in the world that has features like this.
There's quite a few of them.
And just to demonstrate that this
actually goes on live in the system and
not just on a slide in a presentation,
I'm going to bring up WorldText again.
I'll close the Japanese document
that I have open.
And I'm now using the Devanagri keyboard.
You can see some of the keyboards
that are available in Jaguar.
And I'm now going to type that example.
And you can see that as I type,
different characters wind
up in different places.
And the form that's shown on the screen
changes shape as I type each character.
And again, this is only available
to Unicode applications.
Okay, let's switch back to the slides.
So that's some of what you have to worry
about when you're handling Unicode.
But let's now get into the details of
supporting Unicode in your application.
So the first thing you have to worry
about when you're handling Unicode is,
how do I store it?
And Unicode can be stored
in several different forms.
Probably the purest form of Unicode
is what's called the scalar value.
And this is just a number from
0 through 10FFFF that defines a
particular Unicode code point.
The scalar values are
used in HTML and XML.
You saw an example in that
XML keyboard that I brought up.
Those numeric character entities
were Unicode scalar values.
But we don't use that in Mac OS X,
except in the context of HTML or XML.
The format of Unicode that's most
widely used in the industry and that
we use in Mac OS X for Carbon and
Cocoa and Java is the UTF-16 form,
and that represents Unicode code points
as either one or two 16-bit values.
If a Unicode code point
is in the first 64K,
that is, it's from 0 to FFFF,
then it's one 16-bit value.
If it's above that, then you use two.
There's another form of Unicode
called UTF-8 that's used in
the BSD part of Mac OS X and
is also used in Unix systems,
wherever Unicode is used.
The reason is it's compatible with ASCII.
It looks like a multibyte
encoding like ShiftJIS or any
other multiple byte encoding.
And so it works better with software
that's expecting multibyte encodings.
There are one to four bytes per
Unicode scalar value in UTF-8.
And finally,
there's another form called UTF-32,
where each Unicode scale
or value takes 32 bits,
and that form is not used in Mac OS X or
indeed on most other operating systems.
Another issue to worry about in
storing Unicode is the normalization
form that you're going to use.
Well, what does that mean?
This is discussed in Unicode
Standard Annex Number 15,
if you want to read
about it in more detail.
But in Unicode, there's several ways to
represent the same character.
Not for every character,
but for a good many of them.
A very good example is the E with an
acute accent that you see up there.
There's two ways to represent it.
One is by a pre-composed character,
that is the E with acute
accent as one character,
and another is as the character
E followed by a combining accent,
and that's the form you
see on the left there.
And the combining form is
used for most Latin support,
but there are a large number of
pre-composed forms in Unicode as well,
and those are there for compatibility.
So, which form do you use?
That's where the
normalization forms come in.
The fully decomposed form of Unicode,
which is the version that we use for file
names in HFS+, you always store things as
a base character plus a combining mark.
So you'll never see the
pre-composed E with a cute accent
in the fully decomposed form.
That's one form.
And that's what we use in HFS Plus.
But on the Internet and on Windows,
they prefer the other form,
the canonical composed form.
And in that form,
you always use the precomposed
form if it's available.
Sometimes it's not.
In preference to the base character
followed by a combining mark.
And in the currently
shipping version of Mac OS X,
it's possible to convert from the
canonical composed form to another form,
but it's not possible to convert
to the canonical composed form.
We're planning to add support for
that in Jaguar so you can convert
to the canonical composed form in
order to send it to Windows or to
another application that expects it.
And there are two more forms which
I won't discuss today that have to
do with compatibility decompositions.
You can read about them in
Unicode Standard Annex Number 15.
So you have these UTF-16
values which I discussed.
How do you store them?
Well, if you're using Cocoa,
the answer is easy.
It's NSString.
NSString provides string storage.
It will store UTF-16 for you.
Carbon has a subset of
NSString called CFString.
And in addition,
you also have the option of
storing them as raw arrays.
We have a data type called Unicar,
which represents a single
UTF-16 value that you can use.
On disk, either in your own documents
or in a .strings or .plist file
for your app's user interface,
you can use either UTF-8
or BigND and UTF-16.
The UTF-16 format is preferred,
but UTF-8 will work just fine.
Well,
now that you've got some Unicode text,
the first thing you're going
to want to do is process it.
And that's where you can
start to run into trouble.
The first set of issues I'm
going to talk about have to
do with handling characters.
Now, you might think that characters
are pretty simple once you
have 16-bit characters,
but as I've mentioned in the
slide on normalization forms,
there's actually several
different ways to represent them.
So one issue in processing
characters is dealing with clusters.
An example of a cluster is the
base character plus combining form,
which I just showed you,
such as the E with a cute accent.
But it can also occur in other languages.
For example,
the Hidagana character ga there,
which is a base character
ka plus a combining dakuten.
Another issue with representing
characters is surrogates.
Now, I mentioned that characters that are
above the first 64K of UniCode require
two UTF-16 values to represent them,
and those are called a surrogate pair.
So the character on the left
is in the first 64K of UniCode,
so it's represented by
a single UTF-16 value.
But the character on the right is not,
and so it requires two UTF-16
values to represent it.
And finally, because there are different
ways to represent the same
character data in Unicode,
there's different spellings, if you will,
for the same character data.
The pre-combined form on the left
or the decomposed form on the right.
So what happens if you're not aware of
these issues when you're processing data?
Well, one example on the top there is if
I'm not aware that I can have a base
character plus a combining accent,
if I were truncating that text there,
"long resume," I might think that
the combining accent is a separate
character from the base character.
And so when I'm truncating,
I might just lop it off.
As a result, I've now got an unaccented
"e," which is not the result
that the user wants to see.
If I have a surrogate pair
for a character that's not
in the first 64K of UniCode,
and I think that those are two
separate characters because
they're two separate 16-bit values,
then I split the character in two
and I wind up with garbage like that.
And finally,
if I'm doing sorting or searching and
I don't recognize that the precomposed
form of "e" with a cute accent is
the same as the decomposed form,
then I might think that all of
those words are different when,
in fact, they're all exactly the same.
Of course, the way to avoid all these
problems is to use the APIs that
Mac OS X provides to your application.
So for Cocoa applications,
NSString has a pair of APIs.
Range of Composed Character Sequence
at Index will tell your application
the boundaries of a character cluster.
So the base character plus
the combining accents,
or in the case of a surrogate pair,
it will tell you the boundaries
of that surrogate pair.
So if you want to truncate a string
or get a substring out of a string,
you can use that API to find a
safe place to break the string.
The NSString Compare API will compare
two strings in a Unicode-savvy and
locale-sensitive way so that things
like multiple spellings for the
same data are taken into account.
On the Carbon side,
the Unicode utilities have two APIs,
UC Find Text Break and UC Compare Text,
which will find boundaries
in Unicode text and compare
text in a Unicode-savvy way.
And finally,
you can truncate your text while
you're drawing it without actually
having to change the underlying data
by using the Katsu line truncation tag.
And again,
that's done in a Unicode-savvy way.
But wait, there's more.
When you started to get into
the really complex writing
systems that Unicode can support,
there are even more problems,
particularly in support of bidirectional
and cursive scripts and rearrangement.
So let's take a look at some of
these more complex writing systems.
Arabic is a right-to-left language.
It's written right-to-left.
And in addition,
it's also a cursive script,
which means that the letters
flow together and form ligatures.
So in this example,
let me use the mouse pointer again.
The first character,
which is on the left here,
winds up on the right
side of the final result.
And the individual letters
flow together in a cursive way.
Hebrew is also bidirectional
but is not cursive,
so it's a fairly straightforward
alphabetic language,
except that it also goes right to left.
But even English can have
some of these attributes.
For example, the Zapfino font,
which is part of Mac OS X and
has been since the beginning,
is a cursive font and turns
English into a cursive writing system.
So the reason to support these kinds
of writing features is not just for
languages that you may not care about.
It's also to support nice
typography in English.
And as we saw earlier when I showed
an example of typing in Devanagari,
there's also rearrangement where rather
than left to right or right to left,
you have something even more
complicated where things just wind
up in different positions altogether.
So, for example,
you can see that the second character
in this Devanagari string winds up
as the first glyph on the screen.
What happens if you don't take
these issues into account?
Well, probably the biggest problem
in supporting bidirectional or
rearranged text is style runs.
Many, many applications will draw
style runs one at a time.
So you find the first range of characters
that has a given font or a given style.
You draw that.
You take the next range.
That's the way Quick Draw works.
The problem is if you do things
that way and you don't take
bidirectional issues into account,
you get the wrong result.
So, for example, the first string,
which is drawn correctly,
has an English word,
an Arabic word in a large font,
and the same Arabic word in a small font,
followed by another English word.
And because Arabic goes right to left,
it's important that the
first word come on the right.
But if you just draw
style runs left to right,
you'll wind up putting the word
with the large font on the left.
Because it's the first one you
encounter in the text stream,
and the result is wrong.
For scripts with
rearrangement like Devanagri,
you get even worse results if you
assume that things go left to right.
The mapping between a character index
and a glyph index is very complicated,
and if you assume that they're the same,
hit testing, highlighting,
moving the cursor with the arrow keys,
none of that is going to work correctly.
Of course, we provide APIs to work
around all these problems.
Because of bidirectional
issues in Unicode,
to do bidirectional layout correctly,
you have to work on an
entire paragraph at a time.
You can't just do a little bit at a time.
That's the way the Unicode
bidirectional model works.
And by a paragraph,
I just mean the text between one hard
line break and another hard line break.
So both Cocoa and Carbon provide
APIs to do this for you.
On the Cocoa side,
there's NSAttributedString,
which lets you store an entire
paragraph with style runs and all,
and NSTypeSetter,
which will lay that out.
On the Carbon side,
we have AtsuTextLayout and AtsuStyle,
which will also let you represent an
entire paragraph or more of styled text.
That lets the system have all the
text in the paragraph at once so that
it can handle these issues for you.
If you're mapping between character
offsets and coordinates on the screen,
there are APIs available
that will do that for you.
ATSU, Offset to Position and
Position to Offset.
The ATSUI APIs for moving the
cursor with the arrow keys.
And on the Cocoa side,
NSLayoutManager will handle
all of these issues for you.
So all is well and good.
You have your Unicode
application working perfectly.
There's only one problem.
All the data out there is not in Unicode,
or a lot of it isn't anyway.
Your customers have lots of
documents and information that
are not stored in Unicode,
and you need to get that into
your Unicode application.
So how do you do that?
Well, there's many APIs in the system
for doing encoding conversion,
but one thing you need to know
is which encoding the data is in.
And quite often the data isn't
labeled as to which encoding it's in.
There are some APIs you can
use to make a good guess.
Probably the one that you
should use the most often is
Get Application Text Encoding.
And what that does is return
the character encoding that
corresponds to the language that your
application is currently running in.
So if I have an application
that's localized into
several different languages,
and I launch it and
it's running in English,
that encoding will be Mac Roman.
If I launch it and the
Japanese version runs because of
the user's language preference,
then that encoding will be Mac Japanese.
So that's the encoding,
the legacy encoding,
that corresponds to the
language of the user interface.
Usually that's the right choice.
Sometimes it's not.
Sometimes you want to use the encoding
for the user's most preferred language,
regardless of what language
your application is running in.
For that,
you can use CFStringGetSystemEncoding.
And that will return... the legacy
encoding that corresponds to the
language that the user put first
in their language preferences.
If neither of those are right,
then it's pretty much
application dependent.
For many Internet applications,
the character encoding information will
come in as part of the Internet header
or will be embedded in the document,
and you can use that.
Once you know the right
character encoding to use,
there are several APIs available
to convert to and from Unicode.
CFString and NSString both have APIs for
converting between text encodings.
At a lower level,
the text encoding converter is available,
and that supports converting between
a wide variety of character encodings.
And all of these handle not
just legacy Mac OS encodings,
they also support internet,
encodings that are used on the internet
and encodings that are used on Windows.
It's just a wide variety of them.
Now I'd like to go over the
APIs we looked at today and
summarize their capabilities.
We looked at CFString and NSString.
Those provide storage for UTF-16
characters and other encodings as well,
but the basis for those string
APIs is UTF-16 and UniCode.
They provide APIs for string
manipulation and encoding conversion.
In addition, NSString provides more
support for Unicode.
It provides APIs to
find cluster boundaries,
which are very important if you're
going to break a string in the middle,
and for doing locale-sensitive collation.
At a lower level,
the Unicode utilities provide
many functions for doing Unicode
operations in your application.
You can find text boundaries,
that is the boundaries
between characters,
between clusters, between words,
and between lines.
So it contains support for all of those,
both going forwards and going backwards.
They provide APIs for
doing cursor movement.
So if the user hits the arrow key,
you can figure out where to move
the cursor to in either direction.
There are APIs for doing text
comparison or collation for comparing
two strings of Unicode text.
And again,
that's done in a locale-sensitive
and Unicode-savvy way.
And the Unicode utilities also provide
APIs for mapping between the locales
that are used in our more modern
APIs and the regions and script codes
that were used in the script manager.
So if you have some data
that has a script manager
script code or a region code,
the Unicode utilities provide a
way to convert that to a locale.
There are also APIs in the
Script Manager for converting a
script code or region code into
a text encoding that you can use
for character set conversion.
Well,
a lot of this has been very low level,
but fortunately there are also higher
level APIs that will do even more
for you so that you have to worry
about less in your application.
Carbon, there's MLTE,
the Multilingual Text Engine,
and that's a complete text
editing solution for Unicode.
If you use MLTE, you don't have to worry
about cursor movement,
you don't have to worry about
breaking text between characters,
words, or lines.
All that is taken care of for you.
You just put the text in,
and MLTE takes care of displaying
it and supporting editing for you.
It's a superset of the functionality
that was available in the old text
edit APIs that we've had for many
years in Mac OS since the beginning.
On the Cocoa side, there's NSTextView,
which similarly provides a
complete solution for Unicode
text editing and display.
Some other APIs that will be
useful for your application are
the Text Encoding Converter.
Again,
it supports a large number of encodings,
not just for Mac OS,
but for various systems.
And it supports multiple
forms of UniCode,
including, new for Jaguar,
support for converting to the
canonical composed form of UniCode.
If you're doing your own text input,
if you're not using MLTE or if you're
not using NSTextView and you have
to receive Unicode input directly,
then you'll want to use
the Text Services Manager.
And that's necessary to support
input either for Unicode or for
double byte languages or for both.
And again,
if you use MLTE or NS TextView,
you don't have to worry about that.
I'd like to recap what we're
planning to do in terms of
Unicode support for Jaguar.
First of all,
we'll be adding more Unicode coverage.
We'll be adding fonts to support
the GB18030 Chinese standard.
And those fonts have over
32,000 characters in them.
We'll be adding a wide variety of
languages that we supported previously
on Mac OS 9 via the language kits,
as well as a couple more besides.
We're adding supports that you
can drop in new keyboard layouts
without having to edit the system.
And among the keyboard layout
formats that we support is
a new XML text file format,
which makes it really easy to edit
a keyboard layout yourself and add
new keyboard layouts to the system.
And finally, as I mentioned,
we'll be adding support for converting
to the pre-composed form of Unicode,
which should make it a lot
easier to send data out on the
Internet or to Windows systems,
where that's the preferred format.
Well, there is a lot of information
in this presentation,
but there's even more
information out there,
and here are some of the places
that you can go to get that.
The best source of
information about Unicode is,
not surprisingly, the Unicode Consortium,
and the website is www.unicode.org.
And there you'll find
all sorts of information.
You'll find all the technical
reports I mentioned.
You'll find a complete set of code
charts showing a representative glyph
and the character code for every
single character that's in Unicode.
And you'll find sample code
for processing Unicode data.
If you want all that in an
easy-to-reference format,
you can buy a copy of
the Unicode 3.0 book.
There's the ISBN number.
And that's available at
technical bookstores everywhere.
And you can order it from Amazon.com
and all sorts of other places as well.
We have a special web page for users
concerned with international issues,
and that's developer.apple.com/intl,
and that summarizes all of our
international technologies.
So it's kind of one-stop shopping
for finding references to information
that you need to make your application
Unicode and international savvy.
If you're a font developer or
you're interested in fonts,
we have a web page that's specifically
for supporting font developers,
and that's developer.apple.com/fonts.
There you'll find complete specifications
for the TrueType font format,
information on how to add a
morph table to your fonts,
plus a wide variety of font tools
that you can use to edit your fonts
and add more features to them.
There are some other sessions that you'll
probably find useful if you're interested
in the kind of topics we cover today.
This afternoon, there's session 202,
Drawing Text with Atsui,
and this will discuss our
Carbon APIs for drawing Unicode text.
And that's at 3.30 in Room J.
And if you are a Carbon developer,
I strongly recommend
attending this session.
You'll find out a lot more about how to
draw Unicode text in your application.
Tonight, at 7.30,
there's the International Birds of
a Feather session,
which is in Room N downstairs.
And that will be your opportunity to
meet the engineers who work on these
technologies and ask them all sorts
of questions that you might have that
weren't covered in the presentations.
On Thursday,
if you're looking for a higher
level solution for Carbon text,
there's a session on the
multilingual text engine.
That's Thursday at 9 a.m.
in Room A2.
And again, I highly recommend that if
you're a Carbon developer.
And finally,
all of this stuff works perfectly,
but just in case you want to
talk to us for another reason,
there's the International Feedback Forum,
which is Thursday at 5 p.m.
in Room J1.
And I'm sure you won't have
any feedback to give us,
but you can come anyway.